[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Those who have navigated
the rabbit hole of strange
experiences that psychedelic
plants illicit have probably
asked themselves at one
point, what is reality?
How do we know
this world is real
and the strange
world of psychedelics
is just a distortion?
And there is no better candidate
to evoke this kind of response
than dimethyltryptamine, or
more commonly known as DMT.
N, N-dimethyltryptamine
was first
synthesized in 1931
by chemist Richard
Manske in Berlin, Germany.
The psychedelic effects
and its connection
with Amazonian snuffs
like yopo and beverages
like yage and ayahuasca
were unknown at this time.
It would be another 25 years
until Hungarian chemist
and psychiatrist Stephen
Szara synthesized DMT in 1956,
because he couldn't
get his hands
on psilocybin or mescaline.
He read a paper
about South American
hallucinogens
containing this compound
and wanted to see if
this was, in fact,
the compound responsible
for these strange visions.
Oral doses were
administered to no avail.
But he intuited that
another method might
provide different results.
So he injected himself
N, N-dimethyltryptamine
and was the first to publicize
this new psychedelic substance.
But was this the
first time humanity
had discovered the visionary
properties of this compound?
A quick look back into
ancient Egyptian history
and their sacred tree of life
might tell a different story.
>> You'll always find these
acacias along the edge
of the stream beds that
flood occasionally.
You won't see them
halfway up the cliff.
Sometimes, they'll
be a few feet above.
They've got to get those
roots out into that stream bed
or they don't survive.
When it doesn't flood, sometimes
as much as 10 years or more
I'm told, the tree
will go dormant,
and it'll stand here
as if it's dead.
Then suddenly years
later, you get a flood,
and it'll come back to life.
>> Osiris was known to the
ancient Egyptians as the god
of transition, rebirth,
and regeneration.
The myth Osiris is that
he was locked in a chest
and thrown into the Nile River
by his jealous brother, Set.
The chest washed ashore
in the city of Byblos,
where some say an acacia
tree grew around it, housing
the spirit of Osiris, which his
wife Isis eventually recovers.
If it is possible that
the Egyptians discovered
the properties of
the acacia tree,
then a psychedelic
death-rebirth connection
might have come from
the experience elicited
by one of its compounds.
>> If you look at families
that are known to contain DMT
or tryptamines like
acacias, for example,
some of the most potent sources
of DMT known are acacias.
Well, there's about
1,200 species of acacias.
Probably 75% of
those contain DMT.
So it's very common in nature.
It's not an exaggeration to say
that nature is drenched in DMT.
>> Acacia trees were well
known in ancient Egypt,
as well as in the Middle East.
If these civilizations
were experimenters
with local botanicals, as the
tribes of the Amazon were,
it is possible that one of the
local MAOI-containing plants,
such as Syrian rue, which was
common in the Middle East,
could have made it into an
admixture with the acacia tree.
Even yohimbe bark
known to contain MAOI,
originated from
South and West Africa
and was probably imported
to ancient Egypt.
There is no
archaeological evidence
to support this specific
ayahuasca-like concoction.
But it is long known that the
ancient Egyptians experimented
with the psychoactive
blue lilies for ceremony.
The acacia was supposedly used
for the Ark of the Covenant,
insinuating that the wood
embodies an arcane secret.
The Freemasons use the
acacia in their symbolism
for the immortality of the soul.
As the master architect
of King Solomon's temple,
Hiram Abiff was buried
with a sprig of acacia
to mark the grave.
It is also said that the
Hebrews planted acacia
at the head of a grave of a
deceased partner or friend.
Across the ocean
in South America,
the ayahuasca brew is also known
as the vine of the dead or vine
of the soul, which the syncretic
ayahuasca UDV Church claims
that King Solomon paid a little
known visit to the Amazon
in antiquity and imparted
the knowledge of ayahuasca
to the indigenous.
Though these myths
remain circumstantial;
the veneration of these plants
in ancient civilizations
tend to spring from
their usefulness.
Any plant given
spiritual attributes
is likely to have
properties that
cause for higher
visions of reality that
transcend the limits
of birth, death,
and three-dimensional reality.
Today, DMT far
exceeds this criteria.
So, what exactly are
dimethyltryptamine's effects
on consciousness?
>> It begins very quickly.
You begin to feel different
within a heartbeat or two
after the completion
of the injection.
There's a feeling
of acceleration
and inner-psychic tension
that begins and builds quite
rapidly, almost overwhelmingly.
The visual image of the room,
if you had your eyes open,
would start to break out in
a pixelation kind of pattern.
If your eyes are
closed at that stage,
it's a display of
kaleidoscopic images.
Also during that time is a
high pitch kind of sound.
Usually high pitch-- it could
be oscillating "wa, wa, wa"
kind of sound.
Might be some crinkling
kinds of sounds.
But it's increasing
in intensity.
So it's crescendoing,
which kind of
parallels the anxiety or
the feeling of stimulation.
And then you just
break out of your body.
It's as if the internal pressure
just can't be held in the body
anymore, and your
consciousness breaks loose.
And you know, that's kind of
the plateau between two minutes
and seven minutes or so.
And then you start coming down.
And things slowly recongeal.
>> The rapidity, intensity,
and conventional insanity
of the experience has caused
word to reach the public
through the internet, as well as
authors and researchers writing
and speaking on the matter.
Another hot topic is that DMT
is an endogenous compound,
meaning it's produced
naturally in the human body.
And yet no definitive
explanation for this
has been discovered.
>> There is a huge amount
of it in the lungs.
That's where most of is.
But it's throughout all
the tissues in the body.
No one knows what it's
doing in the lungs.
>> Interesting work is
being done right now
on the endogenous functions.
There's a very interesting
book just published
called, "Questions
for the Lion Tamer."
It's about endogenous DMT.
And it's relating
that to all these
other rather
interesting what you
might call physiological
states, which
have to do with gamma-wave
activation in the brain,
and which DMT can
reliably do this.
>> The gamma-brain-wave state
is associated with high-level
cognitive function and
peak concentration,
as seen in studies with
meditating monks and nuns.
Gamma waves originate
in the thalamus
and move back and forth through
the three lobes of the brain
about 40 times per second.
Therefore, it is credited
with integrative processing,
the flow state that athletes
and musicians experience,
and improves memory,
mood, and seems
to optimize many natural
functions of the brain.
>> And what I see is happening
is that as a consequence
of the destabilization of
this central control center
that's linked to the prefrontal
cortex and our egoic thinking
in the top down
management of the brain.
And so what's happening is
that the kind of material
that is normally left in the
unconscious or the subconscious
is now being forced up into
the front of the brain.
So, it's as if these
deep parts of the brain,
these ancient aspects
and are called
the reptilian brain and
the paleomammalian brain
are being liberated
and integrated
into our conscious awareness.
>> This high-level integrative
processing of ancient neural
functions might account for
the deeply profound visions
and feelings of experiencing
and conquering death.
But this still
doesn't answer what
DMT's function is in the body.
Many believe it's an ancestral
neurotransmitter that
used to be more
prominent in our lineage
before modern diets and
lifestyles diminished
its effectiveness.
Others have suggested
that DMT might
be a prenatal
neurotransmitter that
builds the perception
of the pre-birth world,
then gets replaced by
serotonin shortly after birth
to create the consensus
world that we all perceive.
Both compounds cause the
brain to generate distinctly
different models of reality.
But what is a model of reality?
Isn't there only one?
The neurobiologist and chemical
pharmacologist Andrew Gallimore
has been studying
this exact theory.
>> Seeing a world is
not a passive process.
It's always an active process.
The brain is a world-builder.
You can separate the
information, if you like,
into two parts--
the information generated by a
brain and all the information
being generated by whatever's
outside your brain.
You can call it the
external world, if you like.
Your brain is an
information-generator.
And your world is built from
the information generated
by your brain.
And this applies under
all circumstances.
So whether you are in
normal waking life,
when you descend into REM
sleep at night when you dream,
but also if you're on the peak
of a high-power DMT experience.
The world is always
built from information.
So, the idea that one world
is real and another world
is unreal--
the idea that this
waking world is real
and yet the DMT state is not
real is not really supported.
Most people, when they hear
about these strange worlds,
will say this is a
distortion of reality.
This is, perhaps, a breakdown
of the brain's ability
to construct the correct
model of reality.
But there is no true
People always have this
assumption, perhaps,
that the world they
inhabit is the real one.
And that's really
important to them.
What psychedelics do
is they break down
the kind of the boundary
between the real and the unreal.
And they show you actually that
the world is much more fluid.
>> The notion that what we
perceive is merely the way we
and our neurochemistry
causes the information around
and within us to build our
world is mirrored by stand-up
comedian and psychedelic
researcher Shane Mauss.
>> A lot of what we consciously
see we take as fact.
This is a metaphor for
our perception in general.
I don't think we should
trust any of our perception.
I think all of our perceptions
are fickle and subjective.
And I think we should be
really questioning all of them.
This life is a trip.
This life is just as trippy
as any psychedelic experience
you could ever have.
It's just we spend so
much time in this world
that we are bored by
this trip that we're on.
And a psychedelic journey is
such a short amount of time.
And it's so intense,
so novel, so salient.
The brain loves latching
onto stuff like that.
That's why it seems so true.
>> If it is true that
perceptions are merely the way
we decode information around
us, and those perceptions are
subject to personal
and cultural biases,
the question still remains--
why would psychedelics have
the seemingly primary function
of altering our perception?
And do all
psychedelic substances
alter us in the same way?
>> The LSD,
psilocybin, mescaline--
they change the world
to be novel, more fluid,
more unpredictable.
But they seem to
change this world.
It seems to be an alternate
version of the consensus world.
Whereas DMT is different.
DMT changes the
information generated
by the brain in
such a profound way
that it is essentially
what Terence McKenna used
to call a 100% reality switch.
It switches the brain
very, very rapidly
within 30 seconds from
constructing the consensus
world to constructing this
bizarre, highly-complex alien
reality.
And it does it with
great efficiency.
>> Psychiatrist Rick Strassman,
who did the first DMT studies
in the early 1990s
after the prohibition,
published the reports in
his book titled, "DMT:
The Spirit Molecule."
This was the point where
many case reports started
showing very similar
phenomena happening
under the influence of DMT.
>> Well, one of the things
that's unique about DMT is that
it seems to get one into a state
where there is an intelligence.
And so there's been
a lot of speculation
as to what that might be.
Might it be
extra-dimensional beings?
Or might just be
activation of certain areas
of the brain or
something in between,
like psychological processes?
So that's a unique
property of DMT.
And we ought to not
necessarily limit
our scope of it investigating
what it might be.
>> DMT is in a class of its own.
It takes us into a
reality that both feels
more real than this
one and is inhabited
by entities that feel more
real than this world as well.
So, coming out of an
experience like that where
whether or not it's
true, it feels true.
And it creates an opportunity to
reassess your entire worldview,
your spiritual, religious,
and materialistic worldview.
It brings everything
into question.
>> The hot topic that has
emerged from DMT studies is
the recurring theme of
the well-ordered structure
of the place it seems to
send people and the feelings
of entities
inhabiting this space.
There are accounts
of this happening
through the DMT-containing
brew ayahuasca, as well.
There are sparse accounts
of other psychedelic plants
transporting people's
minds to other places
to visit other-worldly beings.
Even psychological
illness has been
known to show similar traits.
However, it is the sheer amount
of reports from DMT alone
and the peculiar realness
of this space and the beings
that cause for a deeper interest
in this compound's effects
on consciousness.
Author and psychedelic
researcher Graham Hancock
has pored over the
DMT trip reports
and found correlations
with shamanic reports
of altered or expanded states.
>> They experience encounters
with supernatural beings,
as they construe them.
Those supernatural beings
may communicate with them
telepathically.
This is very common in
the shamanistic trance.
They may give them teachings.
And very often, they'll have
a therianthropic appearance.
They'd be part animal
and part human.
>> Sometimes they were
malevolent and frightening,
scary, threatening.
They hurt people.
Yeah.
Other times, the
beings, or those things
they encountered that they
called beings, were beneficent.
They did healing.
They gave advice.
Some predicted or showed
volunteers the future.
Some were examining
the volunteers.
Some were putting
things in their bodies.
But one of the hallmarks
of the interaction
was the strength
of those beings.
>> The experiences seemed
to be so life changing that
maintaining the memory and
yet returning to the consensus
world amongst people who can't
conceive of what just happened
to you is a quality that
calls for community counseling
and bonding among others
who've shared the experience.
Over 50% of
Strassman's volunteers
reported beings
that felt distinctly
individual from the volunteer
and indescribably real.
Out of 300 of Phillip Meyer's
trip reports, roughly 66%
of them claimed encountering
intelligent creatures.
Report number 213
said, "I did see
intelligent insect-alien
god beings who
explained that they had created
us and were us in the future.
But that this was all taking
place outside of linear time."
Report number 19 said, "A
gaggle of elf-like creatures
in standard-issue
Irish elf costumes
were doing strange things
with strange objects that
seemed to be a weird hybrid
between crystals and machines."
And well-known psychedelic
psychonaut Terence McKenna
was very vocal about the
possibilities of what
stories like this might mean.
As an avid psychedelic
psychonaut and philosopher,
Terence half-jokingly
mentions global population
and ecological
concerns that may call
for outside-the-box
solutions, such as shrinking
the size of humans to
the size of fruit flies
or even exploring societal
functions within realms
of the imagination to
perform future tasks
rather than depleting
terrestrial resources.
He also lucidly acknowledges
the incredible leap
that the modern mind must
make to accept solutions
that technology and
modern science today
is not capable of thinking.
Yet, balances this by
emphasizing that these problems
do need to be resolved.
And even Albert Einstein said,
problems cannot be solved
by the same level of
thinking that created them.
Can DMT be a physiological key
to unlock higher-level problem
solving?
>> I sincerely believe DMT
is pointing us into an area
of reality that has not
had enough attention.
And that is the
higher-dimensional nature
of reality.
We can try to
perceive or imagine
what more than four
dimensions is like.
But it's not possible in our
current and normal waking
state.
Whereas dimethyltryptamine
gives us an opportunity
to perceive higher
dimensionally,
to actually look at something
either internally or externally
and see it from a space
that contains more than four
dimensions.
>> For space, time, and
form-related problems N,
N-dimethyltryptamine might be
a revolutionary tool in future
generations.
when major problems
need to be resolved
in a short amount of time.
This specific compound
is commonly known
to generate unique geometric
visuals and interactions
with strange beings.
However, there is
another form of DMT
that has been used by the
indigenous of the Amazon
in ayahuasca-like
brews called yage.
5-methoxy, or 5-MeO-DMT, is
quite a bit more potent than
and N, N-DMT.
And mixing these common doses
could cause respiratory arrest,
among other issues on 5-MeO.
However, in the right amount
and under the proper supervision
with a well-trained
sitter, it is
said that the
experience of 5-MeO-DMT
brings the user to a place
beyond time, space, and form.
>> 5-MeO-DMT is 5-methoxy
dimethyltryptamine.
So it's slightly
different chemically.
But in terms of its effects,
5-MeO versus N, N-DMT
are often referred to as
the power and the glory.
5-MeO-DMT is the power.
Whereas N, N-DMT is the glory.
N, N-DMT is the
highly-visual experience.
Whereas 5-methoxy is often
completely non-visual.
But often-- a friend
once described to me--
said that, DMT is like
the fifth dimension,
and 5-methoxy DMT is
like the 12th dimension.
It almost takes you beyond
these worlds and into oneness
into the white light,
as it's often described.
Often much more terrifying
with complete destruction
of the ego, the complete
destruction of the self.
>> Australian researcher
and journalist Rak Razam has
studied Amazonian indigenous
uses and myths of DMT.
>> So, it seems to me that the
indigenous cultures say that
there's a way to navigate the
tryptamine dimensionality.
And the way to do
that is to become
empowered by
rejoining the light.
Now, the Sequoia
tribe in Ecuador--
they call their brew yage.
Right?
It's their word for ayahuasca.
They say that the secret
of yage was given to them
by the star people or
the heavenly beings which
live in the light.
Many cultures across
Peru say that they
were told to make ayahuasca by
the plants or different entity
beings, and how they connect.
The difference with
how they are is
it contains wambisa, which
has 5-MeO-DMT, not the N,
N-DMT in most other
brews in South America.
So, when you drink their
brew, they go to the light.
>> The beta-Carbolines
in the ayahuasca vine are
phytoreactive, meaning they
attack the bacterial, fungal,
parasitic, and viral infections
when exposed to light.
It has also been
suggested by Nick Sand
that he discovered DMT's
piezoluminescent qualities.
Alexander Shulgin confirmed
this by saying, "A totally
pure salt, when dry and
when shaken in the dark,
will emit small flashes
of white light."
Although it might seem likely
that all ceremonies containing
DMT would be done
during the day,
many Amazonian tribes will
only conduct the ayahuasca
ceremonies in total darkness.
Although accredited
scientific research is scarce,
authors Ross Heaven
and Simon Buxton
write in the book,
"Darkness Visible,"
that in total darkness,
melatonin is produced.
But after three to
five days, it gets
converted to pinoline, which
is an endogenous MAOI secreted
by the pineal gland.
It is suggested that the
secretion of pinoline
triggers the production
of endogenous DMT, which
would match the critical
ingredients of ayahuasca.
Unfortunately,
scientific testing
has not been done to
confirm or deny this claim.
The modern confusion
revolving around DMT
and its peculiar
effects has to do
with the newness
of the substance
in the modern
materialist worldview,
as well as the subjectivity
of the experience that
springs forth after ingestion.
Does endogenous DMT play a
crucial yet forgotten role
in the human body?
Are the visionary effects
simply the mind malfunctioning?
Or are they glimpses
beyond the veil
of limited human perception?
Rick Strassman, in his new book
"DMT: The Soul of Prophecy",
takes a new look at the
common yet mysterious realm
of imagination.
>> You know, the importance of
the prophetic state to studying
psychedelics, to
learning about them,
to figuring out what they're
good for, how best to use them,
we need to have as full
an account as possible.
We can't limit ourselves.
That's why I think there's
been a lot more resulting
from the psychedelic
experience in our culture
through the arts as opposed
to through the sciences.
Because it's the imagination
which is being stimulated,
as opposed to the
intellect primarily.
You know, the intellect being
stimulated requires education.
Maybe the imagination
is the point
at which psychedelics act.
>> At present, the imagination
is so scarcely understood that
people are either left to the
conventional reductionist view
that it's generated by
the brain or to mystical
and philosophical explanations.
To know for certain whether
the DMT world actually
exists, perhaps in
another dimension
or in a future holding
space of potentiality
called the imagination,
is beyond all conception,
except to those who dare
to enter that space.
>> Whether DMT is a
different dimension,
or you're accessing this world
inside of your head that you
don't normally have access
to, or you're seeing God,
or whatever, the different
possibilities that there are
are all pretty incredible
and are all pretty important
and all worth looking into.
And definitely we do need to
get down to the bottom of it
and learn more.
>> In order to learn more,
there seems to be two distinct
methods.
Firstly is to dive headfirst
into the experience
by ingesting the
psychedelic substance.
Secondly is to study the
effects the substance has
upon the body and the brain,
whether the substance is
taken or produced endogenously.
The issue with the
second approach
is that even with the
amount of research that
has been conducted,
the data still
must be interpreted by
limited human minds.
Most humble
researchers will admit
that there is no solid
explanation as to what
the DMT world is and why
DMT is produced in the body.
>> The suggestion is in
rats in the last year
or so, there's been confirmation
that DMT is produced
in the pineal gland in rats.
But we do know in general
it's produced in the lungs,
in the spinal fluid, in
different parts of our body.
And then it accumulates
and comes up.
So the pineal gland is
this almost mythical organ
in the body.
They call it the third eye.
The third eye appears in
Egyptian culture, the Eye of Ra
in the mystical sort
of glyphs they have.
It's all through sort of--
well, all through different
historical cultures
the past that really revered
this idea of the third eye
as the gateway.
>> The romantic obsession with
the pineal gland among mystics
and psychedelic psychonauts
may have a neurophysiological
basis, but is currently
still subject to debate.
Therefore, the contention
that the Eye of Ra or Eye
of Horus in the Egyptian culture
represented the pineal gland
can only be seen with
a metaphorical leap.
Some suggest that
the connection lies
in the myth where Horus
gives his eye to Osiris
in the underworld.
Osiris ate the eye
and was resurrected,
which could fit with the
Eleusinian kykeon, Persian
haoma, Vedic soma,
Amazonian ayahuasca; even
the Mazatec mushroom rituals,
which regularly included
death and rebirth experiences.
But at present, only
speculations can be made.
Perhaps our ancestors
with cleaner diets
and more nature-based lifestyles
produced larger amounts.
Perhaps the answer
is lost to history.
Perhaps the DMT world
inhabited by beings
that appear to be
more real than real
can only be explored by
ingesting exogenous sources.
But one thing seems certain.
Romantics may preach
about the possibilities,
and the skeptics may
scoff at the gaps.
But the fact that a
psychedelic compound that
causes the most
mysterious of effects
is produced inside each
and every one of us
is worthy of serious
investigation.
Up next, join us as we dive
into the mysterious and ancient
origins of psilocybin mushrooms
and the scientific research
showing how they're
revolutionizing
psychotherapy and
psychoneurotic exploration.